


    Subject: The Death of Computer Art

    Format: ASCII
    Average Reading Time: 4 min. 29 sec.
    Signal to Noise Ratio:  unknown
    Rating: adult
    Genre: provocation


            After reading with great interest recent discussions about this yearÕs ISEA 
    and Ars Electronica I wanted to offer the following thoughts (partly, as a way 
    to compensate myself for not being able to go to either event this year). 

            Lots of people talk about the coming convergence of computers, 
    communication and television. This convergence will probably happen. In 
    fact, judging from the new models of personal computers which are clearly 
    being positioned as consumer electronic devices (incorporating answering 
    machine and TV cards in them), it is indeed well underway. 

            Those of us who work with digital art often debate another convergence -
    - the convergence between art world and computer art world. I recently came 
    to the conclusion that this particular convergence will NOT happen. Below 
    are the reasons why. 

            (In the following, I will refer to art world -- galleries, major museums, 
    prestigious art journals -- as Duchamp-land, in analogy with Disneyland. I 
    will also refer to the world of computer arts, as exemplified by ISEA, Ars 
    Electronica, SIGGRAPH art shows, etc. as Turing-land). 

            The typical object which is admitted in Duchamp-land (i.e., counted as 
    contemporary art) meets the following characteristics:
            1) Oriented towards the "content." Or, as they say in Hollywood, "its the 
    content, stupid." The content may mean beauty (although towards the end of 
    the century the arts have, by and large, delegated the function of providing 
    beauty for society to MTV and fashion); "metaphors about human condition"; 
    transgressing accepted cultural norms, etc. 
            3) "Complicated." This characteristic requires a further sociological and 
    semiotic analysis, but here we can just say that it refers to the evocation of a 
    multitude of cultural codes requiring to read the object as well as a particular, 
    "post-modern" ironic attitude. 
            2) Ironic,  self-referential,  and often literally destructive attitude towards 
    its material, i.e., its technology, be it canvas, glass, motors, electronics, etc. The 
    examples are the awareness -- which has largely shaped artistic modernism -- 
    of the tension between the illusion and the flatness of the canvas; ironic 
    machines by Duchamp; self-destructive machines by Tinguely. Perhaps the 
    best and most relevant example is the first exhibition of Paik where he 
    screwed technology --  ripping open television sets or changing TV signals by 
    affixing magnets to the monitors. 

            Let us now look at Turing-land. As we will see, Turing-land is 
    characterized by directly opposing characteristics:
            1) Orientation towards new, state-of-the-art computer technology, rather 
    than "content." In the 1960s and 1970s it was exploration of algorithms and 
    cybernetics, later it was computer graphics, few years ago it was CD-ROM and 
    "interactivity" (which is a highly problematic concept because all modern 
    human-computer interfaces are interactive, i.e. a modern computer is an 
    interactive device by definition, so the word does not say anything more than 
    simply that an artwork is using a computer); now it is WWW and "memes"; 
    next year it maybe DVD (digital video disk) or super-high bandwidth 
    networks or something else. In short, Turing-land functions as a place in 
    society where the people from the worlds of culture and art play with latest 
    computer technologies. Sociologically, this is exemplified by the historically 
    changing categories of exhibitions such as Ars Electronica and ISEA: the 
    category of "computer graphics" has been dropped in favor of a new category 
    of "WWW art," etc.
            2) "Simple" and usually lacking irony. See below. 
            3) Most important, objects in Turing-land take technology which they use 
    always seriously. (This is one important difference between current computer 
    art and art and technology movement of the 1960s.) In that, computer art 
    functions exactly like computer industry. How often do you see computer 
    artists seriously confronting and foregrounding the basic nature of computer 
    technology -- that computers always crash; that computer programs run out of 
    memory; that half of the links on the WWW lead nowhere, since nobody 
    cleans up this gigantic dumping site of information site known as "World 
    Wide Web"; that a typical VR user spends her or his time being lirerally lost 
    rather than being engaged in "meaningful" interaction with a virtual world; 
    etc. In short, our civilization is rushing to ground itself in a technology which 
    can only be described as highly unreliable, transient, and incomplete. When 
    computers don't work at a computer art show, the artists and the audience 
    always treat this fact with horror, although they are present at an industry 
    demo -- as opposed to taking this to be a wonderful Dada-like accident.   
            Perhaps only the artists from post-communist societies are ready to 
    recognize that in an information society the noise is as meaningful as the 
    signal, and that the nature of technology is that it does not work as it 
    supposed to. As an example, consider the project (which I already mentioned 
    in my previous post) presented by Russian conceptual poet Dmitry Prigov 
    during ISEA '94. He used a business translation program to translate a famous 
    19th century Russian poem from Russian into Finish, then from Finish into 
    English, and then from English back into Russian (I may have gotten the 
    details wrong but that should not matter). He then declared the mistakes 
    made by computer program (which, designed to deal with business prose, was 
    not very kind to Russian poetry) as his new work of art. Thus, the noise 
    became the signal. (Significantly, this is something which Shannon's 
    mathematical theory of communication, which forms the intellectual 
    backbone of the information society, has recognized half a century ago). 
            But let us return to the battle between Duchamp-land and Turing-land. 
    Shall I conclude from my analysis that now, as Duchamp-land has finally 
    discovered computers and begun to use them with its usual irony and 
    sophistication, gatherings such as ISEA and Ars Electronica should simply be 
    abolished? Probably not. These gatherings do play an important function of 
    being a buffer zone, an interface where the world of culture at large and the 
    world of computer culture meet each other.  Sometimes we even see artists 
    genuinely pushing the boundaries of new media aesthetics, i.e. going beyond 
    what is already accomplished by flight simulators, new computer games with 
    their AI engines, MIT Media Lab projects, etc. In short, on occasion artists are 
    able to compete with computer researchers, rather than simply creating new 
    demos for commercial software, thus functioning as "memes" for computer 
    industry. 
             What we should not expect from Turing-land is art which will be 
    accepted in Duchamp-land. Duchamp-land wants art, not research into new 
    aesthetic possibilities of new media. The convergence will not happen.    

